---
layout: post
title: "Bayesians vs Frequentists, a worthwhile discussion?"
modified:
categories: blog
excerpt: 
tags: [bayes probability statistics]
image:
feature:
date: 2015-04-20
---

Last week in class, we started learning about Bayesian statistics- everything from its theory to its methods and applications. Something about the lecture gripped my attention, and I found myself googling to try to learn more.

What I found was that there is somewhat of a battle in the theoretical realm between so called "Bayesians" and "Frequentists". If you aren't at all familiar with the debate, see below:

[An explanation using a simplified example](http://www.behind-the-enemy-lines.com/2008/01/are-you-bayesian-or-frequentist-or.html)

[A funny comic](https://xkcd.com/1132/)

My interpretation of the debate is that Frequentists make inferences based on generalized, parameterized, probabilities versus Bayesians, who make inferences based on prior probabilities and new evidence.

For example, we assume that when flipping a coin, it is equally probable to flip a head or tails. A frequentist might say that because of our model, which is the assumption that the coin is fair, the probability is then 50%.

On the other hand, Bayesians make inferences based on statistical (experimental) evidence. For example, if we flip a coin 100 times and a head came up 50 times, we can infer from the data that the probability is 50%. If instead, we flipped a head 75 times out of 100, we might have reason to believe that the coin is not fair, and we might decide to update our "probabilities".

**Probability vs Likelihood**

When examining these differences, I came to understand the difference between "probability" and "likelihood" as they are used in statistics. 

From my understanding, probability can be defined as the theoretical chance of achieving a certain result given a model or assumption we have made about that system. P(observation l model)

On the other hand, likelihood can be defined as a statement that can be made about a system based on some observation we have made about that system. L(model l observation)

**Why should we care?**

The goal of applied statistics is to make inferences based on "reality". We should be able to have a framework for udpating our models based on new evidence (a Bayesian concept) as well as a reliable method for testing our models (a Frequentist concept).